Make PKCS12 stores in CA and User `Secrets` optional (#217)
strimzi/proposals: 140-make-PKCS12-stores-in-CA-and-user-secrets-optional.md

# Make PKCS12 stores in CA and User `Secrets` optional

> This proposal suggests adding a new configuration option to disable automatic generation of PKCS12 certificate stores in CAs and `KafkaUser` `Secrets`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal suggests adding a new configuration option to disable automatic generation of PKCS12 certificate stores in CAs and `KafkaUser` Secrets.
```

## Current situation

> Strimzi currently uses PKCS12 certificate stores in multiple different places.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi currently uses PKCS12 certificate stores in multiple places.
```

> Some of them are user-facing and might be used by users:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of them are user-facing:
```

* Cluster and Client CA certificate Secrets have PKCS12-based trust stores
* Secrets of `KafkaUser` resources with `type: tls` authentication generate a PKCS12 key store with a user certificate

> Others are internal only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Others are internal:
```

* Use of PKCS12 stores in MirrorMaker 2 connectors configuration
* Use of PKCS12 stores in Cruise Control configuration

> * Use of PKCS12 stores in Strimzi HTTP Bridge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PKCS12 stores used in MirrorMaker 2 connectors configuration
* PKCS12 stores used in Cruise Control configuration
* PKCS12 stores used in Strimzi HTTP Bridge
```

> The PKCS12 stores that are used only internally are being slowly phased out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PKCS12 stores used internally are being phased out.
```

> This was already done in the past for Kafka, Kafka Connect, and the Topic Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has already been done for Kafka, Kafka Connect, and the Topic Operator.
```

> And we have tracking issues for the remaining work (see [strimzi-kafka-operator#11294](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/11294) and its subtasks).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issues track the remaining work (see [strimzi-kafka-operator#11294](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/11294) and its subtasks).
```

This proposal focuses only on the user-facing uses of PKCS12 stores.

> It does not cover the internal ones, which should be removed independently of this proposal over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It does not cover the internal uses, which are being removed independent of this proposal over time.
```

## History

> The PKCS12 stores were originally included in our CA and user `Secrets` mainly because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PKCS12 stores were originally included in our CA and user Secrets because:
```

* PEM files were not supported by Java-based Apache Kafka clients
* PKCS12 stores were supported by Java-based Apache Kafka clients
* Unlike Java's native JKS stores, PKCS12 stores are easy to generate and work with using non-Java tools such as OpenSSL

> Especially the first limitation does not exist anymore today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first limitation no longer applies.
```

Java-based Apache Kafka clients can now use PEM certificates directly.

> So the need for the PKCS12 stores decreased significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the need for the PKCS12 stores has decreased significantly.
```

> However, they might still be used by some of our users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, they might still be used by some Strimzi users.
```

## Motivation

> The PKCS12 stores make it hard to use Strimzi with custom base container images with various Java distributions and configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PKCS12 stores make it hard to use Strimzi with custom base container images that use various Java distributions and configurations.
```

For example, Java distributions focusing on [FIPS compliance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Information_Processing_Standards) that are based on the Bouncy Castle library do not support PKCS12 stores.

> One popular example of such Java distributions are the [Chainguard Java FIPS container images](https://images.chainguard.dev/directory/image/jdk-fips/overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One popular example of such Java distributions is [Chainguard Java FIPS container images](https://images.chainguard.dev/directory/image/jdk-fips/overview).
```

> Right now, when you try to use Strimzi operators on top of this container image, they will fail while trying to generate the PKCS12 file (either in the Cluster Operator when creating/managing the Cluster and Client CAs, or in the User Operator when creating/managing the user certificates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presently, when Strimzi operators run on this container image, they fail while trying to generate the PKCS12 files.
This can occur in the Cluster Operator (when creating or managing Cluster and Client CAs) or in the User Operator (when creating or managing user certificates).
```

> This proposal suggests working around this issue by adding a flag to disable PKCS12 stores in CA and user `Secrets`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal addresses this issue by adding a flag to disable PKCS12 stores in CA and user Secrets.
```

> This proposal suggests working around this issue by adding a flag to disable PKCS12 stores in CA and user `Secrets`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal addresses this issue by adding a flag to disable PKCS12 stores in CA Secrets (e.g. my-cluster-cluster-ca-cert, my-cluster-clients-ca-cert) and user Secrets generated via KafkaUser resource.
```
I wonder this would make clearer which secrets we are talking about.

> This is similar to what we already have for Network Policies or Pod Disruption Budgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is similar to existing Strimzi configuration for for Network Policies or Pod Disruption Budgets.
```

## Proposal

A new environment variable named `STRIMZI_PKCS12_KEYSTORE_GENERATION` will be introduced to Cluster Operator and User Operator configurations.

> It will default to `true` and in the default state the operators will continue to create and manage the PKCS12 stores in the CA and user `Secrets`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will default to `true`.
In this state, the operators will continue to create and manage the PKCS12 stores in the CA and user Secrets.
```

> Only when set to `false` by the user will the Cluster and User Operators skip PKCS12 generation, and the CA and user `Secrets` will be used without PKCS12 stores and their passwords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When set to `false` by the user, Cluster and User Operators skip PKCS12 generation.
CA and user Secrets are created without PKCS12 stores or passwords.
```

Reviewer: How are existing secrets handled when switching to false?

Reviewer 2: I was wondering the same. Would the `.p12` and `.password` fields in existing secrets be cleaned up when set to false?

Author: They will be removed. I added that to the proposal.

The Cluster Operator will automatically propagate the `STRIMZI_PKCS12_KEYSTORE_GENERATION` configuration to the User Operator deployed as part of a Kafka cluster.
So when `STRIMZI_PKCS12_KEYSTORE_GENERATION` is set to `false` by the user in the Cluster Operator, it will automatically be set to `false` in the User Operator as well.

## Out of scope

The internal uses of PKCS12 stores in MirrorMaker 2 connectors, Strimzi HTTP Bridge, and Cruise Control will not be affected by this proposal and the new configuration option it introduces.

## Affected projects

This proposal affects the Strimzi Cluster and User Operators.

> In terms of our Java code, it also affects the `operator-common` module and its `Ca` and `ClientsCa` classes and their tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Strimzi's Java codebase, it also affects the `operator-common` module and its `Ca` and `ClientsCa` classes and their tests.
```

## Backwards compatibility

> This proposal is fully backwards compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is fully backward compatible.
```

The newly introduced configuration option defaults to the current state.

> So users will not experience any difference unless they actually use the new option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So users will not experience any difference unless they actually enable the new option.
```
